The only thing that I noticed in my 20 years now was that Ludwig Bieler's book, which was published in German press, called Ireland Harbinger of the Middle Ages.
which is really one of the great books on the transmission through the Irish missionaries and what have you, wasn't sighted by him at all.
Strange, you know.
I know him not well, but I interviewed him for that book, and he actually wrote a very nice blurb for my book, and I wrote a keynote.
I enjoyed it.
I wrote my piece on that for St.
Patrick's Day.
Anyway, I thought this book was in the same line as Gracious or whatever it was.
I was not going to...
He saw in my eyes, by the way.
But by golly, I read it with great joy and admiration for his.
Then I read his biography.
And sure, he has a good trait.
But I wonder, you know, if we didn't have the world of Benedict or if we didn't have these Irish missions.
Do you think that it would be lost?
A great deal would be lost.
Not necessarily everything.
You take the cathedral library at Verona.
They'll take you to that cathedral library.
It was a day or two days ago.
How were you?
Yes, two or three days ago.
Take a picture of that?
Sure.
Until the fact that nobody ever used these.
They never even thought of using it.
Nobody told us that.
The stuff lay there untouched.
Nobody was interested.
So it didn't get that until the little ages.
And so you've got these papalites which are sort of
Yeah, I suppose, live mausolea.
Where the stuff, not like Monte Cassino, where the monks were gathering and using, but then Monte Cassino from, I would say 1200, at the time Thomas De Quince was there as a boy, a student, I doubt many of them were doing much about all this stuff.
I think that there are places like some of the cathedral churches in Spain, independent entirely of monastic settings, where you had a learned clergy for a while, and then you had, not necessarily an illiterate clergy, but a clergy with other Catholic religions.
who were literate enough not to throw out the stuff.
You see, that's the problem with our modern libraries.
You see, librarians think they know everything else.
And so, because this isn't of interest to them, therefore it's of no interest to anybody, therefore we don't.
Because libraries are left but we have other individuals before.
Because Confucius said that.
That was ringing.
It stopped.
We won't take up too much more of your time, Father.
You've been very generous.
You know, did you notice?
I'm sorry.
You pressed the button.
and then it flowed out.
Oh, sorry, to get back to the Aquinas.
There are, at present, I think it's 15 people all together working on the critical edition.
My job
is to be nice to them, encourage them, look at their work, but not do anything myself.
Except to look good.
Because this is highly specialized and highly humbling work.
Because, you know, you've got to go through
Hundreds of manuscripts.
Note the variants in all of them.
And for everyone that is actually doing the editing, six may be to existence.
And what do you see?
A volume like that at the end in your name isn't even mentioned yet.
That's the electrician.
I've been yapping for a few days about the fact that I haven't got a ladder to get up.
My light is as high up as that.
I've got three flongs.
One is working.
So I've got a table ladder.
But that is consistent with the tradition through history of the monks working with the copyists in the scriptoria.
They very rarely got their names into... Very rarely.
Great pity.
It would be nice to know who the illuminators or the rubrications were, and they were made of names, perhaps, or who the copyists were.
Lady from Israel, Aliza Kroen.
who worked for many years and we have all, most of the manuscripts there from the suppressed monastery in the monastery.
And she, all the manuscripts ended up in the Vatican Library.
And this is a monastery that, from a monastery that nobody really had much hair done.
And she stumbled on it and somewhere or another found this cache in the Vatican Library.
She used to sit there with, in front of her.
She was only dealing with the 12th century, I think.
So she didn't look at any other manuscripts.
She looked at them, but she didn't study them.
She identified 25 scribes with A, B, C, D, E. There was one lucky bloke.
His name was John.
A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, John.
And she was able to track these out when they began as apprentices.
This is fascinating.
When they moved on to something better.
When they were finally allowed to work.
Did they put this in the books?
Not at all.
She worked it all out.
She lived with it.
This is the 12th century that she reconstructed.
when they graduated to hire things to really do a Bible or something instead of doing kitchen accounts.
And I think it was 25.
And she'd say, don't ever quote this because it would sound as though she would not.
She would say, that's my bee.
Did she publish a book on this problem?
And her name is Cohen?
Aliza Cohen.
A-L-I-Z-A.
Z to you.
I'll check that out.
I think it's called the Monastery of Frankenthal.
F-R-A-N-C-H-A-L.
And it was basically a forgotten monastery, shall we say.
Absolutely.
And defunct, obviously, no more.
The whole Lord has been defunct since about 1515.
So how did it happen that the documents were saved from there?
No, you shouldn't be asking questions like that.
You see, the Protestant elector, the elector of the Palatinate,
That area, which is Heidelberg and all that area there.
He saw the light and became a Protestant in 1550.
And he was a lover of books.
So he suppressed some monasteries in his jurisdiction.
This is an amazing story.
And took their books.
into the great library which became the Palatine Library.
Oh, great library.
Which was in the Church of the Holy Spirit at Heidelberg.
All around, like that.
Imagine the packets, all bookshelves up there.
And then Maximilian of that area,
decided he would liberate this area from such Protestant intruders.
And he got assistance from the Pope about 1620.
Money for his armies, unconditionally that the library was spared.
That's a wonderful story.
That is how Palatine Library is in the Vatican Library today.
Spoils of war.
It's wonderful.
Oh, boy.
It's so great.
Well, of course, it is.
But there was a big exhibition in 1980, about two years after I arrived.
big exhibition for the four hundred years.
Four hundred years of the University of Idaho.
Six hundred years.
That's six hundred.
That's it.
Thirteen eighty-six.
And we sent, I think it was something around two hundred manuscripts.
Two hundred.
You can fall on the bed.
Glorious collection of printed books.
All with Heidelberg bindings.
Most of them printed in Heidelberg, and then bound in Heidelberg, all of them.
Lovely, lovely bindings.
And, I mean, even though there are texts which are to be found everywhere, more or less.
Patristic texts and so on.
being bound and had been printed in Heidelberg and bound in Heidelberg, they had got a special quality.
So we sent those too.
And while they were there, there were little jokes from time to time.
We're gonna keep them.
Not just little jokes.
And because it was 8,000 manuscripts I meant to, all together.
So, the librarian at Heidelberg, who, curiously, for a good Protestant university is a Catholic, the librarian at Heidelberg said to me one day, now, we Catholics don't make much of this, but the plain fact is if they had remained here,
they would have been destroyed by the French.
The French took Heidelberg in 16, these arrived in Nevada in 1623.
The French took Heidelberg, I think it's 1696, something like that, and burned the whole city, including the Church of the Holy Spirit, where that library was, excepting the books were no longer there.
So we saved.
There's no question about it as a matter of fact.
Well, then he said, now don't get too cocky about this, because he said, the French troops were Irish.
I'm talking about mercenaries.
These were the mercenaries.
Oh, that's wonderful.
Very funny.
Can I cover just about everything?
You covered too much.
I would like to know what other projects you have in mind for yourself.
Ah, look, I did a number of, I had left a number of things hanging in 1984, including the addition of that thing of Thomas from the Oxford.
And that is about the first thing I want to finish.
I'll be quite happy, it's the only thing I can finish.
But I'm writing a number of articles.
In my nightlife style they move all over the place.
But I have a number of articles, stuff lying in folders there that I never got around to write, including the early history of this edition of Thomas.
Well, you probably never will, because I'm going to issue it posthumously.
The point is this, that in the Vatican Library, I discovered a cache of documents, all about how this started, which the people professionally in it didn't know about.
So, I mean, I did write three quarters of a long article on it, all the negotiations, and so on, all over Europe.
And the various libraries in the 1880s,
who sent their volumes to Rome, their manuscripts to Rome, for the Dominicans to work on, care of the Vatican Library.
And it's an untold story.
You've got my attention.
And that is one, please God, I want to keep working on.
I don't know where the notes are, unfortunately, probably on the paper.
I haven't sorted out all my stuff yet.
since I moved over in June.
But that's quite a fascinating story.
How do you explain all of this international enthusiasm for this project?
That, in the 1880s, you know.
I think the first sort of exchange of letters was 1879.
The only ones who didn't cooperate, but we don't say this publicly, were the Italians.
Now you see, it was in 1870, was the Resurgency.
And they weren't having any trouble with the Vatican or the church or anything like that.
And so they didn't lend any.
Well, have they subsequently?
Oh, yes.
Do you mind, Father, if I take a photograph or two of you?
We'd love to have a picture of you.
Isn't that interesting?
I thought I'd seen small ones, but I hadn't seen one of them.
I just got this in New York.
And plus, it reverses itself automatically.
It records in both directions.
That's unusual.
It'll automatically go in the other direction.
Is Olympus Japanese?
They're all Japanese.
Oh, are they?
Are they?
Because it really is remote, reverse, off speed, and you get two speeds.
That's right.
I do the slow speed.
And you can even have, which is Japan, Japan, as though you didn't know where Japan was.
They're the optical people.
That's what puzzles me.
These are cameras.
And they're very... I've tried the Sonys.
These Olympuses are the best.
And I'm very hard on them, I have to say.
What's your sort of length of tape, normal tape, if you're doing it at the speed that you did it now?
At the fast speed, it's one hour per size.
At the fast speed, it's 30 minutes per second.
Yes, I know the fast speed.
So this tape... ...a special wall that was built...
The side wall is resting on the line of columns, you see?
So now when you go down, you're going to go right underneath the choir there and all the rest.
What did you say, that wall was a continuation of the wall from the room coming home.
I think even too long.
Oh, that's by the way, that's Cosmotech's payment.
That's the Cosmati family done around the
1220.
That's incredible.
The building here is 1100.
That floor is about 1220.
And look at this, look at this.
Ah yes, I know, the Stainted Roman marches.
There's so much here, you can't turn without nothing.
They were out in the garden.
This is where they were exited.
And they went up underneath the postcard.
Outside that window.
And in 21st they found another passageway leading to the 6th century down.
Which is still not finished.
The same on this side.
All that work is still going on.
You see.
They're supporting them, they're still being supported by states.
So now, you take this to go through and get an idea that I'm keeping an eye on the time, it's going to pass now.
Father, I can't take you now.
Amen.
Thank you.